---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/05-other-ideas/the-tagabala/"}
---

The *Tagabala* are chimeric guardian spirits that watch over a patch of land and its inhabitants. Their domains typically stretch a kilometer from its center to the furthest point on average, although it is very rare for their domains to be cleanly mapped. Younger *Tagabala* born in the current era sport four to six limbs and appear more primate-like. Older *Tagabala*, born in times long past, usually have up to eight limbs. They are known to take on serpentine, quadrupedal, avian, and amphibious forms. Younger ones are typically twice as large as the average person, while elders can take on forms a few stories high. There has been no recorded *Tagabala* that was larger than its domain.

A *Tagabala* is born once an area's borders are clearly defined by all its inhabitants, as well as recognized by a handful of outsiders. They take on forms that are an amalgamation of those living within their domains. In the city, for example, a *Tagabala* might have human faces, rat tails, and roach wings. In a coastal area, however, a *Tagabala* might look more piscine in nature. Once born, a given *Tagabala*'s form rarely changes; they only grow bigger. The only known way to effectively change what one looks like is to significantly change the populations living within their domains. This is also the only known way to slay one.

There are two primary abilities that the *Tagabala* possess across their kind. First, is their ability to shift into a more simplistic form much more closely resembling one of their inhabitants. Their size is the one thing they cannot change, however. As an example, a cityborn one might appear to a human as that human's mother, albeit gigantic in size. Second, and more important, is the *Tagabala*'s ability to see the future - giving their kind its name. They can see disasters waiting to happen, and often warn its inhabitants in some manner. In some cases, *Tagabala* are known to take matters into their own hands.

Behaviorally, *Tagabala* are protective and proud. This does not usually cause issues in the more rural areas. However, due to their surprising disposition to be born more often in urban areas, there has been many known cases of overlapping domains between two or more of these spirits. While not generally harmful, they wage "war" by way of granting gifts to chosen inhabitants and trying to push out others by being a "more giving" or "nicer" guard.